


Pierre Hérigone





Quick Info
Born

      1580
      
      
        
        France
        
      
    
Died

      1643
      
      Paris, France
    

Summary
Pierre Hérigone was a French mathematician who wrote a compendium of elementary mathematics written in French and Latin.





Biography
Pierre Hérigone is actually a pseudonym for the Baron Clément Cyriaque de Mangin. In fact, just to make things even more confusing, Cyriaque de Mangin also used the pseudonym Denis Henrion. He was of Basque origin. Little is known of his life except that he taught for most of it in Paris.


Hérigone's only important work is the six volume Cursus mathematicus, nova, brevi, et clara methodo demonstratus Ⓣ(Course on mathematics : new, short, and with clear methods shown)  or, to give it its French title, Cours mathematique, demonstre d'une nouvelle, briefve, et claire methode  which appeared between 1634 and 1642. In fact remaining copies of the first five volumes were reissued with new title pages in 1644 when the sixth volume was published. This is in fact a fictitious second edition, since it consisted of rebound copies of the first edition volumes which had been unsold. The work is a compendium of elementary mathematics written in both French and Latin. It introduced a complete system of mathematical and logical notation, yet none is used today. Florian Cajori wrote:-
A full recognition of the importance of notation and an almost reckless eagerness to introduce an exhaustive set of symbols is exhibited in the 'Cursus mathematicus' Ⓣ(Course on mathematics) of Pierre Hérigone, in six volumes, in Latin and French ,...
Hérigone did, however, introduce a number of familiar symbols such as ⟂  for 'is perpendicular to'. He also used < for 'angle' but since this is essentially the same as the 'less than' symbol, William Oughtred made a slight modification to  Hérigone's notation using  ∠  for 'angle' in Trigonometria (1657). At a time when an exponent notation was not in common use, Hérigone introduced a2,a3a2, a3a2,a3, etc for the powers of aaa. This is a variant of our present notation in which the powers are raised while in the form in which Hérigone used them they were on the same level as the aaa.


To give a little flavour of this rather strange work, let us note that Hérigone describes a camera obscura in the form of a goblet which was designed so that one could spy on others at the table while drinking from the goblet. It had a cunning optical set-up with a mirror but appears only to have been created for a bit of fun. He also introduced a code by which numbers were translated into words to aid memorising them. The code was as follows: 1=p,a;2=b,e;3=c,i;4=d,o;5=t,u;6=f,ar,ra;7=g,er,re;8=l,ir,ri;9=m,or,ro;0=n,ur,ru1 = p, a; 2 = b, e; 3 = c, i; 4 = d, o; 5 = t, u; 6 = f, ar, ra; 7 = g, er, re; 8 = l, ir, ri; 9 = m, or, ro; 0 = n, ur, ru1=p,a;2=b,e;3=c,i;4=d,o;5=t,u;6=f,ar,ra;7=g,er,re;8=l,ir,ri;9=m,or,ro;0=n,ur,ru. So to remember a number such as 314159 one produced a word such as 'cadator' which then translated back into 314159. The assumption here was that 'cadator' was easier to remember than 314159.


One of the problems which Hérigone looked at in the text concerns an apothecary who had four kinds of medicines, of which the first is hot in the fourth degree, the second is hot in the second degree, the third is cold in the first degree and the fourth is cold in the third degree. He then asks in what proportions the medicines have to be mixed to produce a compound of the first degree of heat. He solves it in a rather clumsy way using a geometrical proof with unnecessary use of several theorems from Euclid's Elements. There are also some gems in the text such as one described in the article [2] where a clear description of the determination of the sine law by Hérigone in the fifth volume of his Cursus mathematicus Ⓣ(Course on mathematics) appears.


We know that Hérigone served on a number of committees and took a full part in the mathematical life of Paris. One committee which he served on was set up to judge whether Jean-Baptiste Morin's scheme for determining longitude from the Moon's motion was practical. The committee members, in addition to Hérigone, were Étienne Pascal, Mydorge, Beaugrand, J C Boulenger and L de la Porte. Hérigone, and the rest of the committee, became involved in a dispute with Jean-Baptiste Morin.


We mentioned above that Hérigone also wrote under the name of Denis Henrion. It was under this pseudonym that he translated Tractatus de Globis Ⓣ(Treatise on the globe) by the English geographer Robert Hues (1554-1632). The original text was written in Latin and published in London in 1594. The translation into French by Denis Henrion was published as Traite des Globes et de Leur Usage, traduit du Latin de Robert Hues, et Augmente de plusieurs nottes et operations du Compas de proportion par D Henrion, mathematicien Ⓣ(Treatise on globes and their use, translated from Latin by Robert Hues, and including several notes and compass operations by D Henrion, mathematician)  in Paris in 1618. As can be seen from the title, Hérigone added his own notes on the use of the compass of proportion. Finally we mention Quatre livres de la géométrie pratique Ⓣ(Four books of practical geometry) published by Cyriaque de Mangin in 1620.





Other Mathematicians born in France





References (show)





P Stromholm, Biography in Dictionary of Scientific Biography (New York 1970-1990). See THIS LINK.
A Malet, Gregorie, Descartes, Kepler, and the law of refraction, Arch. Internat. Hist. Sci. 40 (125) (1990), 278-304.
P Tannery, Mémoires Scientifique X (Paris, 1930), 287-289.






Additional Resources (show)




Other websites about Pierre Hérigone:

Dictionary of Scientific Biography
The Galileo Project,
Google books






Honours (show)




Honours awarded to Pierre Hérigone

Lunar features Crater Herigonius and Rima Herigonius






Cross-references (show)





History Topics: Longitude and the Académie Royale
History Topics: The trigonometric functions
Other: Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics (P)
Other: Earliest Uses of Symbols for Trigonometric and Hyperbolic Functions
Other: Earliest Uses of Symbols from Geometry
Other: Earliest Uses of Symbols of Operation






    Written by J J O'Connor and E F Robertson

    Last Update August 2006
  


